<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023-2025 Legadilo contributors

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
-->

# 7 - API

* **Date:** 2024-10-26
* **Status:** Accepted

## Context

I’d like to build a browser extension to save articles and subscribe to feeds more easily directly on the page we are on.
I think it’s a pretty common feature of feed aggregators and links savers (mostly links savers to be honest).
We have two options:
* Build a proper API and make the browser extension use this API:
  * We have several possibilities to help us build the backend.
    DRF and Django Ninja are the two real pretenders.
    Since we have only a simple feature set and little time, I think Django Ninja is a better fit here: it’s easier to use and should allow us to develop the API faster.
    It’s also async compatible out of the box and based on Pydantic (a popular package I already know and use), which we can reuse for other validations!
  * We will have to develop the API and dig a bit into how to do it properly with Django Ninja.
  * It will unlok other possibilities in the long run in how to use the app (mobile app, integration with third parties…).
  * It should be easier to authenticate to the app: we can manage authentication differently and let the user configure the extension with an application token.
    We could let the cookies be transmitted and rely on that (not sure how they will behave though).
    And it makes the extension very tied to the connection to the app in the browser.
    Whereas the normal flow in this case is to never be disconnected.
    Handling connection with MFA might be a problem too: we can’t display much in the extension and may have to redirect the user the app anyway to login.
    That would be a very poor UX.
  * It should also be easier to post and retrieve data to manipulate it as part of the browser extension.
* Call the standard views (ie the views that power the app):
  * We will have to adapt how we manage CSRF tokens to be able to supply them to our views.
    It’s doable, I’ve done it in the past, but I always disliked it.
  * We will have to post data as form data.
    Not the cleanest way, but manageable.
    Having a view that accepts both JSON and form is too much of a hassle in bare Django for me to do that.
    And if I’m not building an API, there isn’t really a point into bringing a package just for that.
  * We will manipulate HTML.
    It may ease display (but I don’t think we will have anything fancy to display) at the cost of harder manipulations.
    And we won’t be able to use the "normal" templates since we won’t have the same display.
    This implies making some views or templates even more complex.

I think it’s worth trying to develop the API and see how it goes.
If it’s not too much work, I think we should commit to it.

See:
* [Create an API](https://github.com/Jenselme/legadilo/issues/318)
* [Improve the API](https://github.com/Jenselme/legadilo/issues/320)
* [Create a basic browser extension](https://github.com/Jenselme/legadilo/issues/156)


### Authentication

Auth: Django Ninja doesn’t provide anything out of the box to build an auth with tokens.
It does, however, allow us to protect endpoints, routers or the full API with authentication.
It also gives us the basic tooling to fetch a token from the `Authorization` header and validate it.
If it’s valid, access is granted to the endpoint, if not, the user gets an error message.
Django Ninja also allows us to have a list of authentication methods to use, so we can use token-based auth for the extension and cookie auth as usual to try stuff in the browser (and in tests).

How to create tokens to access the API?
The more secure and most flexible way may be to rely on the OAuth2 standard.
As [the wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth) states:

> OAuth (short for open authorization) is an open standard for access delegation, commonly used as a way for internet users to grant websites or applications access to their information on other websites but without giving them the passwords.
> […]
> Generally, the OAuth protocol provides a way for resource owners to provide a client application with secure delegated access to server resources. It specifies a process for resource owners to authorize third-party access to their server resources without providing credentials.

It seems to fit what we are trying to do, and that’s what Wallabag uses.
*But* it’s also very complex with its scopes and its authorization flow.
From what I understand, we also need to supply the username and password to get the first refresh tokens.
So we would need to store the password in the extension (that’s what Wallabag does), and I don’t think it’s a good idea: I’d prefer not to need to copy/paste and then store passwords outside the app.
We propose MFA, but most users won’t enable it, and if the password leaks, anyone could get access to their account from the extension.
In case of leak, users won’t have to change their password either, just the token.
It should also prevent the usage of only the password to authenticate: we’d need to ask for the MFA code to get a token too if we want to be very strict in that regard which would make usage very impractical.
*We need something more simple,* like an application password as used by many apps.

After thinking about it some more and reading:
* We cannot rely on the true user password for this: this would either be painful or circumvent MFA for the API.
  We can rely like most apps on application tokens for that: they are dedicated to an app and thus can be revoked/changed way more easily.
* We don’t need refresh tokens: they are interesting to have short-lived access tokens that don’t need db queries, so we can still revoke permissions to some users.
  We can afford db queries to check the validity of the access token (we are not at a big scale).
* Regarding the application tokens:
  * We could create them from username and password.
    But as part of the extension, this would involve storing them as part of the configuration.
    I don’t think it’s desirable.
    It would also make working with MFA harder.
    And if the password needs to be changed, it would impact all consumers of the API.
  * I think it’s safer to have the user create application "passwords" like in many other apps and create the access tokens from that.
    These application passwords would kind of act as a refresh token and allow the user to get an access token.
  * These passwords won’t be transmitted much over the network: we will transmit them only to get an access token.
    They can be revoked easily from the user profile without impacting anything else.
    We should be able to give them an expiration date just in case.
* We could also only use a simple token to access the API: this token would give direct access to the API, a bit like GH access token.
  * Having all the info encoded in one token makes it easier to use but harder to identify, both for us in case of a leak and for our users.
    Having an email + password combo makes this easier. 
  * It also implies authenticating the user fully at each request and transmitting it at each request, increasing data leakage risk.

Resources:
* [Access Token and Refresh Token: A Comprehensive Guide](https://dev.to/tijan_io/access-token-and-refresh-token-a-comprehensive-guide-40g7)
* [Why Does OAuth v2 Have Both Access and Refresh Tokens?](https://stackoverflow.com/q/3487991)
* [What Are Refresh Tokens and How to Use Them Securely](https://auth0.com/blog/refresh-tokens-what-are-they-and-when-to-use-them/)
* [Improve the security of the API](https://github.com/Jenselme/legadilo/issues/325)


## Decisions

* We will build the API with Django Ninja.
* We will authenticate to the API with application tokens that will be used to create an actual access token usable to access the API.
  They will:
  * Be a long random string stored in the database generated with the `secrets` module.
    This secret will be hashed so db admins can’t access them nor hackers if our database leaks.
    They will thus only be visible to the user once at creation to prevent stealing and because we won’t store them unhashed (so we can’t display them afterward anyway).
    No need for a salt since we are sure the password is unique since we generate it. 
  * Have an optional expiration date.
    If unset, they are valid until manually deleted.
  * To keep things simple and rely on secure code, the application password will be encoded in the database with `django.contrib.auth.hashers.make_passowrd` and checked with `django.contrib.auth.hashers.check_password`.
    It’s probably a bit too secure (with a salt even if we are sure it’s unique) and the argon2 algorithm (even if we are sure it’s long enough not to be found even if hashed with another algorithm).
    Treating these application passwords as true passwords isn’t a problem.
    It also eases the change of the hashing mechanism if needed since it’s handled by Django.
* The access tokens:
  * Will be created from the application token UUID (no enumeration attack this way), email (to ease identify to whom the token is linked to by humans) and of course the secret. 
  * Can have a relatively long validity period.
  * Will be checked against their corresponding application token.
    If the application token is deleted or expired, the access token will be rejected.
  * Will be in the JWT format and will contain the UUID of the application token used to generate it and will contain the id of the user to use.
    This will enable us to store and validate the token using a well-known format with well-known libraries.
* User can manager (list, create, delete) their tokens from their profile page.


## Consequences

* Let’s use Pydantic instead of JSON schemas to validate our JSON model fields and the data we read from external sources.
  This will help us limit the number of libraries we use.
  At this stage, I think Pydantic is a safe choice: it’s well-known and maintained.
  It’s also used a lot in the community nowadays and has become very popular.
* The API won’t allow all capabilities at first to save development time.
  We will develop first and foremost what we need for the extension.
  Extra capabilities will be added later.
* We already unlock some API usage for everybody!
  We will improve it later as part of https://github.com/Jenselme/legadilo/issues/320. 
* The API will be documented more or less automatically and browsable thanks to Swagger.
* We may have to implement FreshRSS API or from some other more popular projects to ease transitions.

### Authentication

* In the long run, we may have to switch to oauth for our tokens.
* The access tokens can evolve based on our needs to include more information without the need for users to change their API credentials.
* Application passwords are unlikely to leak in requests since they are not used much.
* Access tokens have a short lifespan, so a leak isn’t as big a deal as anything else.
  And if the associated application password is revoked, the access token can’t be used anymore.
* Doing a first request with credentials to get an access token that’s short lived seems standard nowadays.
* The access itself is handled by JWTs which are standard and easy to manipulate and extend if needed.
* Getting an access token:
  * Identifying the application password to use is a bit complex: we need a password id to find only the proper rows since a user can have multiple application passwords, and we cannot encode the password itself into something findable in the database because of the salt.
    Having the email makes it easier for a user to know to which account they are connecting to.
    Hashing the password in SHA256 without salt would be acceptable (it’s long and unique since it’s generated by us so a salt isn’t needed) and would allow logins with just the user email and the password despite having multiple passwords for a user.
    It seems more simple and as secure, so it might be worth migrating to that.
  * Usage in API scripts is harder than using a more simple token (like GitHub tokens) since users must first authenticate to get an access token.
    I think it’s common enough anyway not to be a very big problem (it’s just one more call after all).
    And the only user of the API right now is the extension.
    Let’s think about this again when this changes.
